ZAPM - An incomplete guide to an incomplete game

by Cyrus Dolph


INTRODUCTION


ZapM is a science fiction "roguelike" adventure game in which the
intrepid hero -- you! -- explores a derelict space hulk in search of
the fabled "Bizarro Orgasmatron", rumored to be the most powerful
artifact in the galaxy and the only hope of saving the universe from
an unknown doom.

ZapM is intended for an immature audience, and contains foul language
and probably some fart jokes.  If it were a movie, it would be rated
PG-13 and would have gone straight to video.

The game is free (and frankly, you're getting what you paid for!), but
if you actually like it and play it then I say you owe me a beer or a
postcard or something.  Email me (cyrus@zapm.org), or look me up on
the Zapm web site (http://zapm.org).  There's also a bulletin board on
the site where you can talk about the game and submit bug reports.


CUT THE CRAP, HOW DO I PLAY?


ZapM plays a lot like other roguelike games, and care was taken to use
many of the same interface commands as Nethack so it should feel
familiar to many people.


Let's take a typical ZapM screen:

                  ############                                  eit_cyrus      
            ##### #..........#                                  Private        
            +...###..........#############+###                  XL  1:264      
            #...'.'..........'.......+.......#                                 
            #...#####'################.......#                  Str 18  Int  8 
            #...#   #.#                                         Con 14  Wis  8 
            #...#   #.#                                         Agi  9  Cha 14 
            #...#   #.#                                         Dex 13         
            #####   #.#                                                        
                    #.#                                         Speed  -50     
                   ##'######          #######                   Armor   13     
                   #.......#          #F...x#                   HitPts  12(12) 
                   #....{..#          #.....#                   Energy 198(100)
                   #.......#          #....=#                   $5     =87     
                   #.......#          ##@####                   Sore                 
                   #.......#   #########'####                                  
                   #.......#####............#                                  
                   #.......+...'.....>......#                                  
                   #############...........b#                                  
                               ##############                   Space Base 1   
You hit the grid bug.                                                          
The grid bug is derezzed!                                                      
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
Most of the screen is filled with a map of the current level.  This
map is bordered on the bottom by a message window, and on the right
by a status display.  Here is a partial key to explain some of the
symbols on the map (more details below) :

  @ - you, the strapping space hero
  x - a grid bug (a scary monster that wants to kill you)
  + - a closed door
  > - a staircase leading down
  { - a churning vat of ... something!
  = - an ammunition clip

The status window displays up-to-microsecond tactical information
about your character's condition, professional standing, and sex life:

  eit_cyrus        <-- your character's name (defaults to UNIX username).
  Private          <-- professional rank.
  XL  1:264        <-- experience level and experience points (XP).  It takes
                       1000 XP to gain a level in your profession.
  Str 18  Int  8   <-- abilities: Strength, Constitution, Agility, Dexterity
  Con 14  Wis  8                  Intelligence, Wisdom and Charisma.
  Agi  9  Cha 14   
  Dex 13           
                 
  Speed  -50       <-- speed (+100 is double speed, -100 is half speed)
  Armor   13       <-- armor rating (higher is better)
  HitPts  12(12)   <-- hit points / max hit points
  Energy 198(100)  <-- energy / energy capacity
  $5     =87       <-- buckazoids
  Sore             <-- various temporary conditions will be listed in
                       this space.
                   
                   
                 
  Space Base 1     <-- level of the hulk that you're exploring


It is presumed that you are already familiar with RPG concepts such as
hit points, experience levels, and armor class.  If not, go buy a copy
of D&D or something.  (But not 4th edition!)


THE HERO


ZapM is like most RPGs in that the hero chooses a character role.  And
here are the choices:

Janitor: You're used to being ignored by those with more glamorous job
  titles, but it's you who keeps the galaxy turning, unclogging its
  billions and billions of toilets.  You begin your quest with two
  indispensable tools: a master keycard and monkey wrench.

Psion: You're a scrawny freak.  A freak with strange mutant powers.
  Momma always said not to drink radioactive waste, but you didn't
  listen and now your DNA is supercharged. 

Quarterback: Back on Earth, you thrill crowds with your athletic skill
  and you have a cheerleader girlfriend.  But in space, you can be
  savior of the universe!

Software Engineer: Your Mountain Dew gut and carpal tunnel syndrome
  put you at a physical disadvantage but at least you remembered to
  bring your laptop computer along.  And your innate ability to notice
  buggy equipment sure is handy.

Space Marine: You're one of the tough hombres that defends our planet
  against aliens every night and day.  Your equipment is state of the
  badass art, and you've got a badass attitude to match it.

Some professions are just plain more difficult than others.  Probably
the best roles for beginners are the Space Marine and the Software
Engineer.


ABILITIES


Your starting abilities are chosen at random, and modified according
to your profession.  I suppose you could keep restarting until you
get a character with nice stats, but that makes you a weenie.
Besides, you'll get chances to improve them during the game (for
example, you can increase an ability every fourth level you gain).

Strength:     Affects your carrying capacity and the damage you do in
              combat with melee weapons or your bare hands.

Constitution: Figures in to your hit point total and your resistance to
              illness, poison, and the like.

Agility:      Improves your armor class and your chances of landing a 
              blow in melee combat.  Helps you dodge certain attacks.

Dexterity:    Helps (or hurts) your shooting ability.  Important for 
              many manual skills like repairing and picking locks.

Intelligence: Important to your computer hacking skills and certain
              other intellectual pursuits.

Wisdom:       Affects your ability to resist psionic attacks, and
              your chances to spot hidden monsters and traps.

Charisma:     Represents your personal strength and your psionic 
              ability.  Also a measure of how charming you are.

If an ability drops to zero, you die.  An average person's abilities
are around 10.  You'd expect a real space hero to have all 18's or
better, wouldn't you?  Too bad that so far your character is only a
would-be hero.


SKILLS


Your character uses a variety of skills while adventuring.  Your
proficiency rating in a skill is computed by adding the number of
"ranks" you have in that skill to a modifier computed from the skill's
key ability.  You earn a certain number of skill ranks every time you
gain a level, which you can distribute as you wish.

The following weapon skills affect your chances of hitting a target
with a weapon of that type:

Grenade Weapons (Dex): Grenades and any other thrown weapons.

Handguns (Dex): Guns you hold in one hand: pea shooters, pistols,
  laser pistols, phasers, blasters.

Light Guns (Dex): Most guns you aim with both hands: laser rifles,
  shotguns, and sniper rifles.

Heavy Guns (Dex): Badass guns: pulse rifles, railguns, chainguns, and
  laser cannons.

Swords (Agi): Covers all types of swords, including the bat'leth.

Basic Melee Weapons (Agi): Covers all melee weapons that aren't swords,
  from mop to chainsaw.

The following adventuring skills help you in various ways:

Concentration (Con): Helps you sustain any mutant powers you're using
  when you might otherwise get distracted.

Pick Locks (Dex): You can pick locks.

Repair (Dex): You can repair damaged droids, and other things, too.

Search (Int): Gives you a better chance to find secrets when you're 
  actively searching for them.

Spot (Wis): Helps you notice secrets when you're not actively
  searching for them, even from a distance.

Programming (Int): Helps you do things that involve computer progamming.

Mutant Power Skills (Cha): Each power has a skill associated with
  it that improves your chances of using the power successfully.


THE MAZE


Graphics, shmaphics!  These ASCII symbols are all you need to
understand what's going on:

.  The floor.  The dot helps you count squares, I guess.  A blank
   space represents either an area you haven't explored or a part of
   the maze that isn't lit up.

#  A wall.  You can't walk through it.

^  A trap.  Try not to fall in/set it off.  

{  A vat full of radioactive sludge.  You're not really going to drink
   from it, are you?  Gross!

+  A closed door.  Or a bionic implant.  You know, the great thing
   about the future is you don't have to undergo surgery to install a
   cranial implant, it just kinda tunnels its way into your brain in
   like two seconds!

'  An open door.  Did I mention that some doors are automatic, just like
   at the grocery store?  There are also locked doors that you need an
   appropriate keycard to open (or you could just kick it down).
   Also, there could be SEKRIT DOORS!

$  Some money.  The almighty buckazoid can get you all kinds of nifty
   things.  Don't spend it all in one place.

*  An energy cell.  Used by various devices such as geiger counters and
   motion trackers.  It's also ammunition for energy weapons such as 
   laser pistols and phasers.

)  A weapon.  Hopefully it's a rocket launcher, but probably it's a
   rusty laser pistol.

=  Some ammunition, such as bullets, railgun slugs, or shotgun shells.

[  A piece of clothing.  You can wear up to five articles at once: a
   jumpsuit, a suit of armor, a helmet, some eyegear, and a belt.

!  A canister.  It could contain something tasty or it might be deadly
   raygun fuel.  There's more than one way to find out.

?  A floppy disk.  There are all kinds of useful programs on these.
   You did find a computer, right?

/  A ray gun.  Its function depends on what kind of fuel was loaded
   into it.

(  A tool or useful item.  Make sure you have plenty of energy cells.

&  A broken device.  Usually a busted up droid.

@  The hero.  Don't get too attached, because the poor fuck will 
   probably get wasted by a redshirt any minute now.

A-Z,a-z 
   A monster.  Kill it before it kills you.  

You can always use the look command (type '/') to find out what a
character on the map represents.  This can often give you additional
helpful information such as what kind of weapon a monster is wielding.


THE COMMANDS


  7 8 9  You can move around using the numeric keypad.
   \|/   
  4-@-6  If you type the '5' or 'g' key, followed by a direction key,
   /|\   you will continue moving in that direction until you reach a 
  1 2 3  wall or something interesting.
         
  y k u  If you are an old geezer playing on a VAX machine or something,
   \|/   you'll probably want to use the vi/Nethack-style movement keys,
  h-@-l  which you can enable from the options menu (type 'O').  Shift+
   /|\   these keys (YUHJKLBN) will cause you to move in that direction
  b j n  until something interesting is found.

  The '<' and '>' keys are for moving up and down, respectively.
  That's how you can climb staircases.

  These same movement keys will be used when you are asked to specify
  a direction (for example, when aiming a raygun).  In such situations
  you can aim at yourself, if you want, by using the '.' key.

  To fight a monster in melee combat, just walk into it.  You will
  attack with whatever weapon you are currently wielding.

  Here's a list of the other commands (the ^ indicates the Ctrl key):

    ?  Brings up the help menu.

    /  Look at something on the map.

    :  Look at what is here.

    .  Rest (do nothing) for one turn. 

    ,  Pick up an item from the floor.

    i List an inventory of what you're carrying.  Each item is bound
       to a letter a-z or A-Z, which means you can carry up to 52
       different items in your pack.  Several items of the same type
       will stack into one listing, e.g. "h - 3 debugged canisters of
       napalm".

    d  Drop an item from your inventory.

    D  Drop one or items.

    f  Fire your weapon.  

    t  Throw something.

    o  Open a door.

    c  Close a door.

 k,^D  Kick a door, monster, or object.

    s  Search adjacent squares for traps and secret doors.  You'll
       probably want to repeat this command a few times.

    w  Wield a weapon.  You can go unarmed by typing '-' at the 
       ensuing prompt.

    W  Wear a piece of armor or clothing.

    T  Take off a piece of armor.

    I  Install a bionic implant.

    R  Remove an implant.

    a  Activate or apply a tool.

    q  Quaff from a canister or vat.

    x  Execute a floppy disk program.  You must have a computer.

    z  Zap a ray gun. 

  m,Z  Zap a mutant power.  More on this below.

   ^P  Show console message history.

    p  Pay for items in a store.

    S  Save your game and exit.  In ZapM, you get one save file per
       character, so if you die that's it!  Only low-down cheaters
       back up their savefiles (a crime known as savescumming), and
       they never get better at the game.

   ^Q  Quit the game.  This ends your game permanently, are you sure
       you didn't want to save instead?

    O  Options menu.  This is where you can enable vi-keys and
       autopickup mode.

    E  Look at your skills.

    A  Adjust inventory.  You can change the letter bound to an item.

    N  Name an object or class of objects. 

    V  Display Version and Copyright information. 

Many commands will prompt you to choose an object from your inventory
to use - just type the letter of the appropriate item.  A list of the
likely item letters will be displayed, and you can press '?' to expand
that list into a menu with descriptions for those items.  In some
cases, you can press '*' to select an object from a menu of your
entire inventory.  Also, some commands allow you specify an item count
by typing numbers in the inventory prompts and menus.  For example,
you could type the key sequence "d14b" to drop 14 of item b.  Type '-' 
at such a prompt to select nothing; for example type "w-" to wield no 
weapon, and fight with your bare hands.


MUTANT POWERS


If your character has any mutant powers, you'll be able to zap them
with the 'Z' command.  This will bring up a menu listing all your
powers and your chances of successfully using each one.  This chance
depends on several factors such as your charisma score, your character
level, the level of the power, and your skill.  Also, wearing certain
equipment (particularly cranium implants) hampers your aura and
interferes with your psionic ability.

When you attempt to use a power, your charisma will be temporarily
reduced according to the level of the power.  Your charisma will
regenerate on its own, or you can hurry the process using certain
items.  Most mutant powers cause one-time effects, but some powers
such as X-Ray Vision will be maintained until you deactivate them.
Charisma spent on these persistant powers won't be restored while they
are still in use.

How do you gain new mutant powers?  You'll have to figure that out
for yourself!  


ENERGY


Much of the high-tech equipment is powered by electric energy.  There
are two sources of energy: energy cells and power plants.  Energy
cells are essentially batteries - each one contains a single charge
and when it is expended, the hero discards it.  Power plants have a
energy reservoir that is automatically recharged over time.  Whenever
you use a weapon or other item that needs energy, it will automatic-
ally be drawn from one of these sources.  Some tools that you activate
will continuously draw energy, so make sure you keep an eye on your
power level!


ITEMS


An important part of ZapM is collecting and identifying useful items.
The function of objects such as floppy disks and ray guns is unknown
until you identify them somehow.  Until you've identified these items,
all you will have to go by is the label or description (for example,
"a floppy disk labeled XERTH Q3").  Any two objects in the game with
the same label or description will be of the same type, but these
assignments are randomized every time you start a new game.  Wouldn't
be any fun, otherwise, right?

There are a number of ways to identify items.  The simplest and most
dangerous method is just use it and see what happens.  If the effect
is obvious (and you don't die in the process), ZapM will automatically
remember it so that next time you encounter a similer object you'll
know what it is.  If the effect is unclear, you will be given an
opportunity to provide your own description for the object (just as if
you had typed 'N' to use the Name command) as a helpful note (for
example, "a canister called This smells good").

Weapons and armor can have program enhancements that make them more
effective.  The degree of enhancement is denoted by a number, which
indicates the degree to which your ability to hit and damage with a
weapon is improved, or the degree to which your armor rating is
improved with an item of clothing.  For example, a +2 suit of armor
will give you an extra two points of armor rating.  Sometimes
enhancement number can be negative, which results in a detrimental
effect.  

Some of the objects you find in the game have been optimized by clever
programming wizards, while others are riddled with bugs.  Optimized
equipment generally works better, while buggy equipment tends not to
function very well and can have all kinds of unpleasant side effects.
Buggy weapons will become glued to your hands, and it is impossible to
take off buggy clothing and armor through normal means.  If you know
the quality of an item, it will be denoted in the description as
"buggy", "debugged", or "optimized".

Try to get your hands on a computer and some of floppy disks of
identify to help determine the nature of your equipment.


HAPPY ZAPPING!


Well, that's all I'm gonna write for now.  Besides, the game is new
and likely to change dramatically so I'll probably have to redo this
whole document anyway.  

Please, please send me bug reports and feedback at http://zapm.org!!

Good luck and I hope you have fun!
