You have come here bearing the body of your mentor.  It was his request
that interment be performed here.

Oddly, the station gave no response to your docking request.  You pull
into an open shuttle bay and prepare to disembark.  Nobody came to greet
you nor to extract docking fees.  The hangar is devoid of all personnel
save for a bunch of service robots.  You enlist them to help with proper
burial procedures, carefully overseeing that all rituals are performed
exactly as is required by tradition.

After this silent funeral you sit down and reminisce many events you
and your master lived through together.  A certain memory refuses to
leave your mind, continuing to pester you mercilessly.  Long ago driven
by curiosity you managed to get your mentor badly drunk.  He raved about
his exploits of youth for hours on end.  His passion would wane when he
got to tell about the Bizarro Orgasmatron, an artifact of untold power he
was absolutely sure existed, but never found.  Every journey to obtain it
proved fruitless and made him the mockery of his peers.  The legendary
elusive Orgasmatron ... you know he desired it.  That was his greatest
dream.  Sadly, he never got to turn it into reality.

Master said the artifact is rumored to be lost somewhere at this space
station, thus his wish to at least be put to rest somewhere close to the
fabled device.  It is customary to mourn your guide of life for a week
staying near the site of burial and performing honorable acts to glorify
the memory of the passed warrior.  You come to a conclusion: the quest
for Bizarro Orgasmatron starts now.  Honoring the dead is the right thing
to do and there is no better way to please the soul of your mentor.
After all you will be staying here for awhile.  The Orgasmatron will be
yours, or you shall not dare proudly call yourself *heroname* again.
