This guide is somewhat outdated but we have nothing better so here
it goes.

PRIME - Space Hulk Nethackish Roguelike Swagger Cyborg Ninja
        Mutant Zombie from Hell.


INTRODUCTION


PRIME is a science fiction "roguelike" adventure game in which the
intrepid hero -- you! -- explores a derelict space hulk in search of
the fabled "Bizarro Orgasmatron", rumored to be the most powerful
artifact in the galaxy and the only hope of saving the universe from
an unknown doom.

PRIME is intended for an immature audience, and contains foul language
and probably some fart jokes.  If it were a movie, it would be rated
PG-13 and would have gone straight to video.

The game is free and frankly, you're getting what you paid for!.  If you
like it best way to reach developers is by emailing them (addresses at
the bottom of this file) or by posting at forums at the Temple of the
Roguelike located at http://roguetemple.com/forums/


CUT THE CRAP, HOW DO I PLAY?


PRIME plays a lot like other roguelike games, and care was taken to use
many of the same interface commands as Nethack so it should feel
familiar to many people.  You may select key map similar to other well
known roguelike game.  Upon first run you will be asked to make choice.


Let's take a typical PRIME screen:

                  ############                                  eit_cyrus      
            ##### #..........#                                  Private        
            +...###..........#############+###                  XL  1:264      
            #...'.'..........'.......+.......#                   
            #...#####'################.......#                  Str 18  Int  8 
            #...#   #.#                                         Con 14  Wis  8 
            #...#   #.#                                         Agi  9  Cha 14 
            #...#   #.#                                         Dex 13         
            #####   #.#                                          
                    #.#                                         Speed  -50     
                   ##'######          #######                   Armor   13     
                   #.......#          #F...x#                   HitPts  12(12) 
                   #....{..#          #.....#                   Energy 198(100)
                   #.......#          #....=#                   $5     =87
                   #.......#          ##@####                   Sore 
                   #.......#   #########'####                                  
                   #.......#####............#                                  
                   #.......+...'.....>......#                                  
                   #############...........b#                                  
                               ##############                   Space Base 1   
You hit the grid bug.                                                          
The grid bug is derezzed!                                                      



Most of the screen is filled with a map of the current level.  This
map is bordered on the bottom by a message window, and on the right
by a status display.  Here is a partial key to explain some of the
symbols on the map (more details below) :

  @ - you, the strapping space hero
  x - a grid bug (a scary monster that wants to kill you)
  + - a closed door
  > - a staircase leading down
  { - a churning vat of ... something!
  = - an ammunition clip

The status window displays up-to-microsecond tactical information
about your character's condition, professional standing, and sex life:

  eit_cyrus        <-- your character's name (defaults to UNIX username).
  Private          <-- professional rank.
  XL  1:264        <-- experience level and experience points (XP).  It takes
                       1000 XP to gain a level in your profession.
  Str 18  Int  8   <-- abilities: Strength, Constitution, Agility, Dexterity
  Con 14  Wis  8                  Intelligence, Wisdom and Charisma.
  Agi  9  Cha 14   
  Dex 13           
                 
  Speed  -50       <-- speed (+100 is double speed, -100 is half speed)
  Armor   13       <-- armor rating (higher is better)
  HitPts  12(12)   <-- hit points / max hit points
  Energy 198(100)  <-- energy / energy capacity
  $5     =87       <-- buckazoids
  Sore             <-- various temporary conditions will be listed in
                       this space.
                   
                   
                 
  Space Base 1     <-- level of the hulk that you're exploring


It is presumed that you are already familiar with RPG concepts such as
hit points, experience levels, and armor class.  If not, go read up
on wikipedia or something.


THE HERO


PRIME is like most RPGs in that the hero chooses a character role.
Press <tab> while in profession selection screen to learn about the
choices.

Some professions are just plain more difficult than others.  Probably
the best roles for beginners are the Space Marine and the Software
Engineer.


ABILITIES


Your starting abilities are chosen at random, and modified according
to your profession.  I suppose you could keep restarting until you
get a character with nice stats, but that makes you a weenie.
Besides, you'll get chances to improve them during the game (for
example, you can increase an ability every fourth level you gain).

If an ability drops to zero, you die.  An average person's abilities
are around 10.  You'd expect a real space hero to have all 20's or
better, wouldn't you?  Too bad that so far your character is only a
would-be hero.


SKILLS


Your character uses a variety of skills while adventuring.  Your
proficiency rating in a skill is computed by adding the number of
"ranks" you have in that skill to a modifier computed from the skill's
key ability.  You earn a certain number of skill ranks every time you
gain a level, which you can distribute as you wish.


THE MAZE


Graphics, shmaphics!  These ASCII symbols are all you need to
understand what's going on:

.  The floor.  The dot helps you count squares, I guess.  A blank
   space represents either an area you haven't explored or a part of
   the maze that isn't lit up.

#  A wall.  You can't walk through it.

^  A trap.  Try not to fall in/set it off.  

{  A vat full of radioactive sludge.  You're not really going to drink
   from it, are you?  Gross!

+  A closed door.  Or a bionic implant.  You know, the great thing
   about the future is you don't have to undergo surgery to install a
   cranial implant, it just kinda tunnels its way into your brain in
   like two seconds!

'  An open door.  Did I mention that some doors are automatic, just like
   at the grocery store?  There are also locked doors that you need an
   appropriate keycard to open (or you could just kick it down).
   Also, there could be SEKRIT DOORS!

$  Some money.  The almighty buckazoid can get you all kinds of nifty
   things.  Don't spend it all in one place.

*  An energy cell.  Used by various devices such as geiger counters and
   motion trackers.  It's also ammunition for energy weapons such as 
   laser pistols and phasers.

)  A weapon.  Hopefully it's a rocket launcher, but probably it's a
   rusty laser pistol.

=  Some ammunition, such as bullets, railgun slugs, or shotgun shells.

[  A piece of clothing.  You can wear up to five articles at once: a
   jumpsuit, a suit of armor, a helmet, some eyegear, and a belt.

!  A canister.  It could contain something tasty or it might be deadly
   raygun fuel.  There's more than one way to find out.

?  A floppy disk.  There are all kinds of useful programs on these.
   You did find a computer, right?

/  A ray gun.  Its function depends on what kind of fuel was loaded
   into it.

(  A tool or useful item.  Make sure you have plenty of energy cells.

&  A broken device.  Usually a busted up droid.

@  The hero.  Don't get too attached, because the poor fuck will 
   probably get wasted by a redshirt any minute now.

A-Z,a-z 
   A monster.  Kill it before it kills you.  

You can always use the look command (type '/') to find out what a
character on the map represents.  This can often give you additional
helpful information such as what kind of weapon a monster is wielding.


THE COMMANDS


  7 8 9  You can move around using the numeric keypad.
   \|/   
  4-@-6  If you type the '5' or 'g' key, followed by a direction key,
   /|\   you will continue moving in that direction until you reach a 
  1 2 3  wall or something interesting.
         
  y k u  If you are an old geezer playing on a VAX machine or something,
   \|/   you'll probably want to use the vi/Nethack-style movement keys,
  h-@-l  which you can enable from the options menu (type 'O').  Shift+
   /|\   these keys (YUHJKLBN) will cause you to move in that direction
  b j n  until something interesting is found.

  The '<' and '>' keys are for moving up and down, respectively.
  That's how you can climb staircases.

  These same movement keys will be used when you are asked to specify
  a direction (for example, when aiming a raygun).  In such situations
  you can aim at yourself, if you want, by using the '.' key.

  To fight a monster in melee combat, just walk into it.  You will
  attack with whatever weapon you are currently wielding.

No point in listing all commands here. Access them from in-game
by pressing question mark.

Many commands will prompt you to choose an object from your inventory
to use - just type the letter of the appropriate item.  A list of the
likely item letters will be displayed, and you can press '?' to expand
that list into a menu with descriptions for those items.  In some
cases, you can press '*' to select an object from a menu of your
entire inventory.  Also, some commands allow you specify an item count
by typing numbers in the inventory prompts and menus.  For example,
you could type the key sequence "d14b" to drop 14 of item b.  Type '-' 
at such a prompt to select nothing; for example type "w-" to wield no 
weapon, and fight with your bare hands.


MUTANT POWERS


If your character has any mutant powers, you'll be able to zap them
with the 'Z' command.  This will bring up a menu listing all your
powers and your chances of successfully using each one.  This chance
depends on several factors such as your charisma score, your character
level, the level of the power, and your skill.  Also, wearing certain
equipment (particularly cranium implants) hampers your aura and
interferes with your psionic ability.

When you attempt to use a power, your charisma will be temporarily
reduced according to the level of the power.  Your charisma will
regenerate on its own, or you can hurry the process using certain
items.  Most mutant powers cause one-time effects, but some powers
such as X-Ray Vision will be maintained until you deactivate them.
Charisma spent on these persistant powers won't be restored while they
are still in use.

How do you gain new mutant powers?  You'll have to figure that out
for yourself!  


ENERGY


Much of the high-tech equipment is powered by electric energy.  There
are two sources of energy: energy cells and power plants.  Energy
cells are essentially batteries - each one contains a single charge
and when it is expended, the hero discards it.  Power plants have a
energy reservoir that is automatically recharged over time.  Whenever
you use a weapon or other item that needs energy, it will automatic-
ally be drawn from one of these sources.  Some tools that you activate
will continuously draw energy, so make sure you keep an eye on your
power level!


ITEMS


An important part of PRIME is collecting and identifying useful items.
The function of objects such as floppy disks and ray guns is unknown
until you identify them somehow.  Until you've identified these items,
all you will have to go by is the label or description (for example,
"a floppy disk labeled XERTH Q3").  Any two objects in the game with
the same label or description will be of the same type, but these
assignments are randomized every time you start a new game.  Wouldn't
be any fun, otherwise, right?

There are a number of ways to identify items.  The simplest and most
dangerous method is just use it and see what happens.  If the effect
is obvious (and you don't die in the process), PRIME will automatically
remember it so that next time you encounter a similer object you'll
know what it is.  If the effect is unclear, you will be given an
opportunity to provide your own description for the object (just as if
you had typed 'N' to use the Name command) as a helpful note (for
example, "a canister called This smells good").

Weapons and armor can have program enhancements that make them more
effective.  The degree of enhancement is denoted by a number, which
indicates the degree to which your ability to hit and damage with a
weapon is improved, or the degree to which your armor rating is
improved with an item of clothing.  For example, a +2 suit of armor
will give you an extra two points of armor rating.  Sometimes
enhancement number can be negative, which results in a detrimental
effect.  

Some of the objects you find in the game have been optimized by clever
programming wizards, while others are riddled with bugs.  Optimized
equipment generally works better, while buggy equipment tends not to
function very well and can have all kinds of unpleasant side effects.
Buggy weapons will become glued to your hands, and it is impossible to
take off buggy clothing and armor through normal means.  If you know
the quality of an item, it will be denoted in the description as
"buggy", "debugged", or "optimized".

Try to get your hands on a computer and some of floppy disks of
identify to help determine the nature of your equipment or try asking
Melnorme for some favors.


HAPPY ZAPPING!


The document is incomplete and some parts are outdated but not horribly
so.  PRIME is changing too fast right now and not unlike most other
software documentation tends to lag badly begind.

Please send bug reports and feedback to us at psiweapon@gmail.com and
michal@kast.net.pl!
